diff = is used to find differences between two files. On its own, it’s a bit hard to use; instead, use it with diff -u to find lines which differ in two files:
diff -u = is used to compare two files, line by line, and have the differing lines compared side-by-side in the same output. 

Patch = is useful for applying file differences. See the below example, which compares two files. The comparison is saved as a .diff file, which is then patched to the original file!
There are some other interesting patch and diff commands such as patch -p1, diff -r !

Diff commands:
Compare FILES line by line.

       Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short
       options too.

       --normal
              output a normal diff (the default)

       -q, --brief
              report only when files differ

       -s, --report-identical-files
              report when two files are the same

       -c, -C NUM, --context[=NUM]
              output NUM (default 3) lines of copied context

       -u, -U NUM, --unified[=NUM]
              output NUM (default 3) lines of unified context

       -e, --ed
              output an ed script

       -n, --rcs
              output an RCS format diff

       -y, --side-by-side
              output in two columns

       -W, --width=NUM
              output at most NUM (default 130) print columns

       --left-column
              output only the left column of common lines

       --suppress-common-lines
              do not output common lines

       -p, --show-c-function
              show which C function each change is in

       -F, --show-function-line=RE
              show the most recent line matching RE

       --label LABEL
              use LABEL instead of file name and timestamp (can be
              repeated)

       -t, --expand-tabs
              expand tabs to spaces in output

       -T, --initial-tab
              make tabs line up by prepending a tab

       --tabsize=NUM
              tab stops every NUM (default 8) print columns

       --suppress-blank-empty
              suppress space or tab before empty output lines

       -l, --paginate
              pass output through 'pr' to paginate it

       -r, --recursive
              recursively compare any subdirectories found

       --no-dereference
              don't follow symbolic links

       -N, --new-file
              treat absent files as empty

       --unidirectional-new-file
              treat absent first files as empty

       --ignore-file-name-case
              ignore case when comparing file names

       --no-ignore-file-name-case
              consider case when comparing file names

       -x, --exclude=PAT
              exclude files that match PAT

       -X, --exclude-from=FILE
              exclude files that match any pattern in FILE

       -S, --starting-file=FILE
              start with FILE when comparing directories

       --from-file=FILE1
              compare FILE1 to all operands; FILE1 can be a directory

       --to-file=FILE2
              compare all operands to FILE2; FILE2 can be a directory

       -i, --ignore-case
              ignore case differences in file contents

       -E, --ignore-tab-expansion
              ignore changes due to tab expansion

       -Z, --ignore-trailing-space
              ignore white space at line end

       -b, --ignore-space-change
              ignore changes in the amount of white space

       -w, --ignore-all-space
              ignore all white space

       -B, --ignore-blank-lines
              ignore changes where lines are all blank

       -I, --ignore-matching-lines=RE
              ignore changes where all lines match RE

       -a, --text
              treat all files as text

       --strip-trailing-cr
              strip trailing carriage return on input

       -D, --ifdef=NAME
              output merged file with '#ifdef NAME' diffs

       --GTYPE-group-format=GFMT
              format GTYPE input groups with GFMT

       --line-format=LFMT
              format all input lines with LFMT

       --LTYPE-line-format=LFMT
              format LTYPE input lines with LFMT

              These format options provide fine-grained control over the
              output

              of diff, generalizing -D/--ifdef.

       LTYPE is 'old', 'new', or 'unchanged'.
              GTYPE is LTYPE or 'changed'.

              GFMT (only) may contain:

       %<     lines from FILE1

       %>     lines from FILE2

       %=     lines common to FILE1 and FILE2

       %[-][WIDTH][.[PREC]]{doxX}LETTER
              printf-style spec for LETTER

              LETTERs are as follows for new group, lower case for old
              group:

       F      first line number

       L      last line number

       N      number of lines = L-F+1

       E      F-1

       M      L+1

       %(A=B?T:E)
              if A equals B then T else E

              LFMT (only) may contain:

       %L     contents of line

       %l     contents of line, excluding any trailing newline

       %[-][WIDTH][.[PREC]]{doxX}n
              printf-style spec for input line number

              Both GFMT and LFMT may contain:

       %%     %

       %c'C'  the single character C

       %c'\OOO'
              the character with octal code OOO

       C      the character C (other characters represent themselves)

       -d, --minimal
              try hard to find a smaller set of changes

       --horizon-lines=NUM
              keep NUM lines of the common prefix and suffix

       --speed-large-files
              assume large files and many scattered small changes

       --color[=WHEN]
              colorize the output; WHEN can be 'never', 'always', or
              'auto' (the default)

       --palette=PALETTE
              the colors to use when --color is active; PALETTE is a
              colon-separated list of terminfo capabilities

       --help display this help and exit

       -v, --version
              output version information and exit

       FILES are 'FILE1 FILE2' or 'DIR1 DIR2' or 'DIR FILE' or 'FILE
       DIR'.  If --from-file or --to-file is given, there are no
       restrictions on FILE(s).  If a FILE is '-', read standard input.
       Exit status is 0 if inputs are the same, 1 if different, 2 if
       trouble.
       
       
       Patch commands:
       patch takes a patch file patchfile containing a difference
       listing produced by the diff program and applies those
       differences to one or more original files, producing patched
       versions.  Normally the patched versions are put in place of the
       originals.  Backups can be made; see the -b or --backup option.
       The names of the files to be patched are usually taken from the
       patch file, but if there's just one file to be patched it can be
       specified on the command line as originalfile.

       Upon startup, patch attempts to determine the type of the diff
       listing, unless overruled by a -c (--context), -e (--ed), -n
       (--normal), or -u (--unified) option.  Context diffs (old-style,
       new-style, and unified) and normal diffs are applied by the patch
       program itself, while ed diffs are simply fed to the ed(1) editor
       via a pipe.

       patch tries to skip any leading garbage, apply the diff, and then
       skip any trailing garbage.  Thus you could feed an article or
       message containing a diff listing to patch, and it should work.
       If the entire diff is indented by a consistent amount, if lines
       end in CRLF, or if a diff is encapsulated one or more times by
       prepending "- " to lines starting with "-" as specified by
       Internet RFC 934, this is taken into account.  After removing
       indenting or encapsulation, lines beginning with # are ignored,
       as they are considered to be comments.

       With context diffs, and to a lesser extent with normal diffs,
       patch can detect when the line numbers mentioned in the patch are
       incorrect, and attempts to find the correct place to apply each
       hunk of the patch.  As a first guess, it takes the line number
       mentioned for the hunk, plus or minus any offset used in applying
       the previous hunk.  If that is not the correct place, patch scans
       both forwards and backwards for a set of lines matching the
       context given in the hunk.  First patch looks for a place where
       all lines of the context match.  If no such place is found, and
       it's a context diff, and the maximum fuzz factor is set to 1 or
       more, then another scan takes place ignoring the first and last
       line of context.  If that fails, and the maximum fuzz factor is
       set to 2 or more, the first two and last two lines of context are
       ignored, and another scan is made.  (The default maximum fuzz
       factor is 2.)

       Hunks with less prefix context than suffix context (after
       applying fuzz) must apply at the start of the file if their first
       line number is 1.  Hunks with more prefix context than suffix
       context (after applying fuzz) must apply at the end of the file.

       If patch cannot find a place to install that hunk of the patch,
       it puts the hunk out to a reject file, which normally is the name
       of the output file plus a .rej suffix, or # if .rej would
       generate a file name that is too long (if even appending the
       single character # makes the file name too long, then # replaces
       the file name's last character).

       The rejected hunk comes out in unified or context diff format.
       If the input was a normal diff, many of the contexts are simply
       null.  The line numbers on the hunks in the reject file may be
       different than in the patch file: they reflect the approximate
       location patch thinks the failed hunks belong in the new file
       rather than the old one.

       As each hunk is completed, you are told if the hunk failed, and
       if so which line (in the new file) patch thought the hunk should
       go on.  If the hunk is installed at a different line from the
       line number specified in the diff, you are told the offset.  A
       single large offset may indicate that a hunk was installed in the
       wrong place.  You are also told if a fuzz factor was used to make
       the match, in which case you should also be slightly suspicious.
       If the --verbose option is given, you are also told about hunks
       that match exactly.

       If no original file origfile is specified on the command line,
       patch tries to figure out from the leading garbage what the name
       of the file to edit is, using the following rules.

       First, patch takes an ordered list of candidate file names as
       follows:

        • If the header is that of a context diff, patch takes the old
          and new file names in the header.  A name is ignored if it
          does not have enough slashes to satisfy the -pnum or
          --strip=num option.  The name /dev/null is also ignored.

        • If there is an Index: line in the leading garbage and if
          either the old and new names are both absent or if patch is
          conforming to POSIX, patch takes the name in the Index: line.

        • For the purpose of the following rules, the candidate file
          names are considered to be in the order (old, new, index),
          regardless of the order that they appear in the header.

       Then patch selects a file name from the candidate list as
       follows:

        • If some of the named files exist, patch selects the first name
          if conforming to POSIX, and the best name otherwise.

        • If patch is not ignoring RCS, ClearCase, Perforce, and SCCS
          (see the -g num or --get=num option), and no named files exist
          but an RCS, ClearCase, Perforce, or SCCS master is found,
          patch selects the first named file with an RCS, ClearCase,
          Perforce, or SCCS master.

        • If no named files exist, no RCS, ClearCase, Perforce, or SCCS
          master was found, some names are given, patch is not
          conforming to POSIX, and the patch appears to create a file,
          patch selects the best name requiring the creation of the
          fewest directories.

        • If no file name results from the above heuristics, you are
          asked for the name of the file to patch, and patch selects
          that name.

       To determine the best of a nonempty list of file names, patch
       first takes all the names with the fewest path name components;
       of those, it then takes all the names with the shortest basename;
       of those, it then takes all the shortest names; finally, it takes
       the first remaining name.

       Additionally, if the leading garbage contains a Prereq: line,
       patch takes the first word from the prerequisites line (normally
       a version number) and checks the original file to see if that
       word can be found.  If not, patch asks for confirmation before
       proceeding.

       The upshot of all this is that you should be able to say, while
       in a news interface, something like the following:

              | patch -d /usr/src/local/blurfl

       and patch a file in the blurfl directory directly from the
       article containing the patch.

       If the patch file contains more than one patch, patch tries to
       apply each of them as if they came from separate patch files.
       This means, among other things, that it is assumed that the name
       of the file to patch must be determined for each diff listing,
       and that the garbage before each diff listing contains
       interesting things such as file names and revision level, as
       mentioned previously.
       
        -b  or  --backup
          Make backup files.  That is, when patching a file, rename or
          copy the original instead of removing it.  When backing up a
          file that does not exist, an empty, unreadable backup file is
          created as a placeholder to represent the nonexistent file.
          See the -V or --version-control option for details about how
          backup file names are determined.

       --backup-if-mismatch
          Back up a file if the patch does not match the file exactly
          and if backups are not otherwise requested.  This is the
          default unless patch is conforming to POSIX.

       --no-backup-if-mismatch
          Do not back up a file if the patch does not match the file
          exactly and if backups are not otherwise requested.  This is
          the default if patch is conforming to POSIX.

       -B pref  or  --prefix=pref
          Use the simple method to determine backup file names (see the
          -V method or --version-control method option), and append pref
          to a file name when generating its backup file name.  For
          example, with -B /junk/ the simple backup file name for
          src/patch/util.c is /junk/src/patch/util.c.

       --binary
          Write all files in binary mode, except for standard output and
          /dev/tty.  When reading, disable the heuristic for
          transforming CRLF line endings into LF line endings.  This
          option is needed on POSIX systems when applying patches
          generated on non-POSIX systems to non-POSIX files.  (On POSIX
          systems, file reads and writes never transform line endings.
          On Windows, reads and writes do transform line endings by
          default, and patches should be generated by diff --binary when
          line endings are significant.)

       -c  or  --context
          Interpret the patch file as a ordinary context diff.

       -d dir  or  --directory=dir
          Change to the directory dir immediately, before doing anything
          else.

       -D define  or  --ifdef=define
          Use the #ifdef ... #endif construct to mark changes, with
          define as the differentiating symbol.

       --dry-run
          Print the results of applying the patches without actually
          changing any files.

       -e  or  --ed
          Interpret the patch file as an ed script.

       -E  or  --remove-empty-files
          Remove output files that are empty after the patches have been
          applied.  Normally this option is unnecessary, since patch can
          examine the time stamps on the header to determine whether a
          file should exist after patching.  However, if the input is
          not a context diff or if patch is conforming to POSIX, patch
          does not remove empty patched files unless this option is
          given.  When patch removes a file, it also attempts to remove
          any empty ancestor directories.

       -f  or  --force
          Assume that the user knows exactly what he or she is doing,
          and do not ask any questions.  Skip patches whose headers do
          not say which file is to be patched; patch files even though
          they have the wrong version for the Prereq: line in the patch;
          and assume that patches are not reversed even if they look
          like they are.  This option does not suppress commentary; use
          -s for that.

       -F num  or  --fuzz=num
          Set the maximum fuzz factor.  This option only applies to
          diffs that have context, and causes patch to ignore up to that
          many lines of context in looking for places to install a hunk.
          Note that a larger fuzz factor increases the odds of a faulty
          patch.  The default fuzz factor is 2.  A fuzz factor greater
          than or equal to the number of lines of context in the context
          diff, ordinarily 3, ignores all context.

       -g num  or  --get=num
          This option controls patch's actions when a file is under RCS
          or SCCS control, and does not exist or is read-only and
          matches the default version, or when a file is under ClearCase
          or Perforce control and does not exist.  If num is positive,
          patch gets (or checks out) the file from the revision control
          system; if zero, patch ignores RCS, ClearCase, Perforce, and
          SCCS and does not get the file; and if negative, patch asks
          the user whether to get the file.  The default value of this
          option is given by the value of the PATCH_GET environment
          variable if it is set; if not, the default value is zero.

       --help
          Print a summary of options and exit.

       -i patchfile  or  --input=patchfile
          Read the patch from patchfile.  If patchfile is -, read from
          standard input, the default.

       -l  or  --ignore-whitespace
          Match patterns loosely, in case tabs or spaces have been
          munged in your files.  Any sequence of one or more blanks in
          the patch file matches any sequence in the original file, and
          sequences of blanks at the ends of lines are ignored.  Normal
          characters must still match exactly.  Each line of the context
          must still match a line in the original file.

       --merge or --merge=merge or --merge=diff3
          Merge a patch file into the original files similar to diff3(1)
          or merge(1).  If a conflict is found, patch outputs a warning
          and brackets the conflict with <<<<<<< and >>>>>>> lines.  A
          typical conflict will look like this:

              <<<<<<<
              lines from the original file
              |||||||
              original lines from the patch
              =======
              new lines from the patch
              >>>>>>>

          The optional argument of --merge determines the output format
          for conflicts: the diff3 format shows the ||||||| section with
          the original lines from the patch; in the merge format, this
          section is missing.  The merge format is the default.

          This option implies --forward and does not take the --fuzz=num
          option into account.

       -n  or  --normal
          Interpret the patch file as a normal diff.

       -N  or  --forward
          When a patch does not apply, patch usually checks if the patch
          looks like it has been applied already by trying to reverse-
          apply the first hunk.  The --forward option prevents that.
          See also -R.

       -o outfile  or  --output=outfile
          Send output to outfile instead of patching files in place.  Do
          not use this option if outfile is one of the files to be
          patched.  When outfile is -, send output to standard output,
          and send any messages that would usually go to standard output
          to standard error.

       -pnum  or  --strip=num
          Strip the smallest prefix containing num leading slashes from
          each file name found in the patch file.  A sequence of one or
          more adjacent slashes is counted as a single slash.  This
          controls how file names found in the patch file are treated,
          in case you keep your files in a different directory than the
          person who sent out the patch.  For example, supposing the
          file name in the patch file was

          /u/howard/src/blurfl/blurfl.c

       setting -p0 gives the entire file name unmodified, -p1 gives

          u/howard/src/blurfl/blurfl.c

       without the leading slash, -p4 gives

          blurfl/blurfl.c

       and not specifying -p at all just gives you blurfl.c.  Whatever
       you end up with is looked for either in the current directory, or
       the directory specified by the -d option.

       --posix
          Conform more strictly to the POSIX standard, as follows.

           • Take the first existing file from the list (old, new,
             index) when intuiting file names from diff headers.

           • Do not remove files that are empty after patching.

           • Do not ask whether to get files from RCS, ClearCase,
             Perforce, or SCCS.

           • Require that all options precede the files in the command
             line.

           • Do not backup files when there is a mismatch.

       --quoting-style=word
          Use style word to quote output names.  The word should be one
          of the following:

          literal
                 Output names as-is.

          shell  Quote names for the shell if they contain shell
                 metacharacters or would cause ambiguous output.

          shell-always
                 Quote names for the shell, even if they would normally
                 not require quoting.

          c      Quote names as for a C language string.

          escape Quote as with c except omit the surrounding double-
                 quote characters.

          You can specify the default value of the --quoting-style
          option with the environment variable QUOTING_STYLE.  If that
          environment variable is not set, the default value is shell.

       -r rejectfile  or  --reject-file=rejectfile
          Put rejects into rejectfile instead of the default .rej file.
          When rejectfile is -, discard rejects.

       -R  or  --reverse
          Assume that this patch was created with the old and new files
          swapped.  (Yes, I'm afraid that does happen occasionally,
          human nature being what it is.)  patch attempts to swap each
          hunk around before applying it.  Rejects come out in the
          swapped format.  The -R option does not work with ed diff
          scripts because there is too little information to reconstruct
          the reverse operation.

          If the first hunk of a patch fails, patch reverses the hunk to
          see if it can be applied that way.  If it can, you are asked
          if you want to have the -R option set.  If it can't, the patch
          continues to be applied normally.  (Note: this method cannot
          detect a reversed patch if it is a normal diff and if the
          first command is an append (i.e. it should have been a delete)
          since appends always succeed, due to the fact that a null
          context matches anywhere.  Luckily, most patches add or change
          lines rather than delete them, so most reversed normal diffs
          begin with a delete, which fails, triggering the heuristic.)

       --read-only=behavior
          Behave as requested when trying to modify a read-only file:
          ignore the potential problem, warn about it (the default), or
          fail.

       --reject-format=format
          Produce reject files in the specified format (either context
          or unified).  Without this option, rejected hunks come out in
          unified diff format if the input patch was of that format,
          otherwise in ordinary context diff form.

       -s  or  --silent  or  --quiet
          Work silently, unless an error occurs.

       --follow-symlinks
          When looking for input files, follow symbolic links.  Replaces
          the symbolic links, instead of modifying the files the
          symbolic links point to.  Git-style patches to symbolic links
          will no longer apply.  This option exists for backwards
          compatibility with previous versions of patch; its use is
          discouraged.

       -t  or  --batch
          Suppress questions like -f, but make some different
          assumptions: skip patches whose headers do not contain file
          names (the same as -f); skip patches for which the file has
          the wrong version for the Prereq: line in the patch; and
          assume that patches are reversed if they look like they are.

       -T  or  --set-time
          Set the modification and access times of patched files from
          time stamps given in context diff headers.  Unless specified
          in the time stamps, assume that the context diff headers use
          local time.

          Use of this option with time stamps that do not include time
          zones is not recommended, because patches using local time
          cannot easily be used by people in other time zones, and
          because local time stamps are ambiguous when local clocks move
          backwards during daylight-saving time adjustments.  Make sure
          that time stamps include time zones, or generate patches with
          UTC and use the -Z or --set-utc option instead.

       -u  or  --unified
          Interpret the patch file as a unified context diff.

       -v  or  --version
          Print out patch's revision header and patch level, and exit.

       -V method  or  --version-control=method
          Use method to determine backup file names.  The method can
          also be given by the PATCH_VERSION_CONTROL (or, if that's not
          set, the VERSION_CONTROL) environment variable, which is
          overridden by this option.  The method does not affect whether
          backup files are made; it affects only the names of any backup
          files that are made.

          The value of method is like the GNU Emacs `version-control'
          variable; patch also recognizes synonyms that are more
          descriptive.  The valid values for method are (unique
          abbreviations are accepted):

          existing  or  nil
             Make numbered backups of files that already have them,
             otherwise simple backups.  This is the default.

          numbered  or  t
             Make numbered backups.  The numbered backup file name for F
             is F.~N~ where N is the version number.

          simple  or  never
             Make simple backups.  The -B or --prefix, -Y or
             --basename-prefix, and -z or --suffix options specify the
             simple backup file name.  If none of these options are
             given, then a simple backup suffix is used; it is the value
             of the SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX environment variable if set,
             and is .orig otherwise.

          With numbered or simple backups, if the backup file name is
          too long, the backup suffix ~ is used instead; if even
          appending ~ would make the name too long, then ~ replaces the
          last character of the file name.

       --verbose
          Output extra information about the work being done.

       -x num  or  --debug=num
          Set internal debugging flags of interest only to patch
          patchers.

       -Y pref  or  --basename-prefix=pref
          Use the simple method to determine backup file names (see the
          -V method or --version-control method option), and prefix pref
          to the basename of a file name when generating its backup file
          name.  For example, with -Y .del/ the simple backup file name
          for src/patch/util.c is src/patch/.del/util.c.

       -z suffix  or  --suffix=suffix
          Use the simple method to determine backup file names (see the
          -V method or --version-control method option), and use suffix
          as the suffix.  For example, with -z - the backup file name
          for src/patch/util.c is src/patch/util.c-.

       -Z  or  --set-utc
          Set the modification and access times of patched files from
          time stamps given in context diff headers. Unless specified in
          the time stamps, assume that the context diff headers use
          Coordinated Universal Time (UTC, often known as GMT).  Also
          see the -T or --set-time option.

          The -Z or --set-utc and -T or --set-time options normally
          refrain from setting a file's time if the file's original time
          does not match the time given in the patch header, or if its
          contents do not match the patch exactly.  However, if the -f
          or --force option is given, the file time is set regardless.

          Due to the limitations of diff output format, these options
          cannot update the times of files whose contents have not
          changed.  Also, if you use these options, you should remove
          (e.g. with make clean) all files that depend on the patched
          files, so that later invocations of make do not get confused
          by the patched files' times.
          
          Enviornment:
           PATCH_GET
          This specifies whether patch gets missing or read-only files
          from RCS, ClearCase, Perforce, or SCCS by default; see the -g
          or --get option.

       POSIXLY_CORRECT
          If set, patch conforms more strictly to the POSIX standard by
          default: see the --posix option.

       QUOTING_STYLE
          Default value of the --quoting-style option.

       SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
          Extension to use for simple backup file names instead of
          .orig.

       TMPDIR, TMP, TEMP
          Directory to put temporary files in; patch uses the first
          environment variable in this list that is set.  If none are
          set, the default is system-dependent; it is normally /tmp on
          Unix hosts.

       VERSION_CONTROL or PATCH_VERSION_CONTROL
          Selects version control style; see the -v or --version-control
          option.
